## To build debian-live with unionmount you will need

  * A linux kernel with unionmount support
    - Get a kernel from [Valerie Aurora's git repo](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/val/linux-2.6.git;a=shortlog;h=refs/heads/ext2_works). This is a work in progress but using this kernel you should be able to boot Debian Live. You can check the repo for more up-to-date branches.
    - Configure and build the kernel. A suggested [configuration file for i686 based on stock Debian configuration](../config-2.6.36-rc5-i686+). Setting or unsetting some configuration options may not work yet.

    make-kpkg --rootcmd fakeroot --initrd --append-to-version -um-i686 kernel-image kernel-headers

   - Unfortunately kernel-package and initramfs-tools package maintainers can't agree on a way to tell initramfs-tools to generate an initramfs so you will need to generate one in a [hook](../zzz-initramfs.sh) (put in chroot_local-hooks). Also cross-building i686 on amd64 seems broken.


  * Mount command with unionmount support
    - here is a [patch](../util-linux-union.patch) which you can apply to Squeeze util-linux and rebuild. It may break some other options, I am not sure how those defines are supposed to work. You only need the mount package.
  * Put your mount command into your initramfs
    - a [patch](../unionmount_initramfs_mount.patch) you can apply to live-initramfs either directly or put it in chroot_local-patches
  * Tell live-initramfs to use unionmount instead of aufs
     - Use some arguments like these with lb config

    -k um-i686+ \

    --bootappend-live union=unionmount \

    --packages "httpfs2 less open-iscsi links2" \

    --linux-packages linux-image-2.6.36-rc5 \

