# Roadmap

## Debian 7.0.1 "wheezy" aka live-* 3.x

  * [Remaining issues to be solved for the next wheezy point-release](http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=706618)

## Debian 8.0 "jessie" aka live-* 4.x

  * live-*:
    - check everything to use conf.d really everywhere (interfaces.d, fstab.d, etc.).
    - debian de-branding, make it as nice as possible for derivatives.
    - decide on point '4' from earlier about /lib/live/* stuff and multifs-images
      http://lists.debian.org/debian-live/2012/10/msg00025.html

  * live-boot:
    - finish scripts transition.
    - add port to dracut.
    - add support for 'new' roofs encryption using losetup with cryptoloop et al.

  * live-build:
    - finalize on dpkg/debhelper-ish config tree layout.
    - support building multiple images combinations from one config tree and in a row.
    - support building foreign binary images in proper.
    - get rid of templates/ and stuff everything into bootloaders/
    - mdadm hook incomplete, needs to remove the mdadm initramfs hook,
      and then rebuild initrd to be effective.
    - netboot: include non-free firmware in both the installer and the live initrd.
    - confirm that non-free is in sources.lists for non-free images when installed (preseed that for d-i)?
    - review the contents/structure of .disk
    - review the content/structure of binary/ for all binary images
    - support pinning of udebs
    - get as far as possible with rewriting individual helpers in Python

  * live-build/live-boot:
    - include an ext4 secondary partition on the image (10mb or so) configured for persistence and resize it on first boot with persistence from within live-boot.
    - move live/filesystem.dir to live/filesystem

  * live-config:
    - use live-debconfig for everything.
    - improve support when being run with persistence (so that still the system is 'reconfigured' on boot).
    - gconfg -> gsettings or whatever migration, is done, does it work?

* live-tools:
    - revamp persistence script and manpage

## Debian 9.0 "no-name-yet" aka live-* 5.x

  * live-build:
    - add GUI and web frontends.

## Infrastructure (unsorted)

  * live.d.n:
    - setup ikiwiki for live-build.debian.net
    - re-organize autobuild layout in live-manual
    - use filter-command in irker
